---
title: Should I Do a Ph.D.? Paul Rubin
category: Interview
date: 2013-08-25
slug: should-i-do-a-phd-paul-rubin
aliases: [/blog/2013/Aug/25/should-i-do-a-phd-paul-rubin/]
---

__Update 12-08-2014:__ I decided to make a dedicated website to host the interviews. You can find it at [shouldigetaphd.com](http://shouldigetaphd.com/).

For the second interview, I talked to Paul Rubin, Professor Emeritus of Management Science at Michigan State University.

_A 22-year old college student has been accepted to a Ph.D. program in a technical field. He's academically talented, and he's always enjoyed school and his subject matter. His acceptance is accompanied with 5-years of guaranteed funding. He doesn't have any job offers but suspects he could get a decent job as a software developer. He's not sure what to do. What advice would you give him, or what questions might you suggest he ask himself as he goes about making the decision?_

__Paul:__

1. Do you want to be a college professor who teaches and does research, do you want to teach college but not do research, or do you want to get a job in industry (including government, non-profits etc. in that category)? The first path requires a Ph.D.. The second path may require a Ph.D. if you want to work at some private colleges, but it may also be possible to get a good teaching job with just a masters degree (which will put you into the salary pool faster). With the third category, it varies. There are quite a few industry jobs that require only a bachelor's or masters degree, while some require a Ph.D..

2. Do you enjoy (or do you think you will enjoy) research? Getting a Ph.D. is a major commitment of time, a substantial portion of which is quite likely to be devoted to original research. Some institutions, in some fields, allow "expository" dissertations -- such as an annotated history of military purchasing patterns, from Goliath to the 21st century Pentagon -- but in technical fields and/or at reasonably prestigious schools, dissertations are very likely to require original research. Some people enjoy doing research, some hate it, some fall in between. If you do not enjoy doing research, pursuing a Ph.D. will be difficult, unfulfilling and possibly pointless (since you will not want a job with research expectations).

3. How important is compensation to you versus how interesting the work is, personal prestige, etc.? A Ph.D. is often the ticket to jobs that are more intellectually stimulating than those requiring just a bachelor's degree, with the caveat that "often" does not equal "always". For some people, being able to identify themselves as "John Doe, Ph.D." also carries some value. The compensation side is less clear. Compensation tends to go up with job experience (at least in industry; not as reliably in academe), and a lengthy postgraduate education delays your entry into the workforce. Even if you have an assistantship, you will likely make less money as a student than you would as an employee with a bachelor's degree. Add in educational expenses you will incur and the fact that you will enter the workforce with less accrued history and experience, and possibly in a lower position or at a lower salary (depending on the job) than where you would have been at graduation date if you had gone straight into industry, and you may be better off from a purely economic perspective going straight to work. (On the other hand, you may miss out on a fair bit of fun as a graduate student. Work is, after all, a four letter word.) When I was completing my Ph.D., my intention was to go into industry. In one of my job interviews, I discovered that the employer counted a Ph.D. as the equivalent of something between two and four years of work experience for salary purposes, although it was taking me six years (post-bachelor's) and change.

4. Are you geeked by the idea of going as far as you can in a particular field? As a high school student, I made up my mind that I would get a Ph.D., not because I had any real sense of comparative job prospects, but simply because I wanted to take my education as far as I could in my chosen discipline (mathematics).

_Would you recommend he take some time off prior to grad school, or should he jump right in?_

__Paul:__ This varies according to the individual. A Ph.D. program can be a long slog, especially starting from a bachelor's degree, so if you are a bit burned out on school after getting that bachelor's, definitely take some time off and work. Working helps recharge the bank account, and is also a useful motivator. Once you have experienced the 9 - to - 5 grind, you may see that Ph.D. in a whole new light. (I experienced the wonders of office drone life working summers while I was in college, so I did not need a gap between undergraduate and Ph.D. studies to convince me that anything that delayed having to work for a living was a good idea.)

In some disciplines, having relevant industry experience will help put course work in perspective, will help enforce the relevance of some theoretical results, and will help to assess the low likelihood of satisfying the assumptions behind other theories. A special case is the desire to teach and do research in a technical field (such as Management Science) in a business school. Some business schools are skeptical of purely technical types. When it comes time to find a faculty position, having "real world business experience" in addition to that technical Ph.D. may well make you more attractive. (Having an MBA would make you still more attractive.) In part this has to do with somewhat fuzzy accreditation standards; in part it stems from a not-unreasonable belief that knowing something about how businesses actually operate will help you in the classroom, even when teaching technical subjects; and in part it reflects the desire for greater staffing flexibility (being able to plug you into a less technical, more business-oriented course if push comes to shove). That last consideration may well exist in other application areas besides business.

If you are not burnt out, your bank account is not drained, and you do not need to acquire "real world credibility", going straight into the Ph.D. program has two majors advantages. First, it gets you out the other end and into your career trajectory that much sooner. (See previous comments about the economics of the decision.) Second, you will have developed certain studying skills and habits along the way, and if your record is good enough to get you into a Ph.D. program, those skills and habits are apparently fairly effective. For many people, there is a nontrivial atrophy of their study skills while they are employed, particularly in jobs not strongly related to their primary discipline. Some students have attributed lower than anticipated scores on graduate entrance examinations to a dulling of their test-taking abilities. A seamless transition from undergraduate to graduate studies is in some ways analogous to a distance runner not having to break stride.

_Do you have any thoughts on going from undergrad into a Ph.D. program verses first completing a masters?_

Paul: In business, an MBA is not strictly an interior point on the line segment connecting bachelor's degree to Ph.D. It covers substantial material outside your discipline, it brings perspectives distinct from those you will have in the Ph.D. program (and very often distinct from those in the undergraduate program), and (as noted above) can be a valuable credential.
---

In most technical disciplines, on the other hand, a Ph.D. thoroughly subsumes a masters degree. Having both a masters and doctorate in mathematics is no better than having just a doctorate. The primary, if not exclusive, virtue of the intermediate masters degree is to allow you to dip your toes into the graduate education pool. Often, though, a doctoral program has an early exit strategy that allows students who lose interest in the Ph.D. or fail to get past some hurdle (usually comprehensive examinations) to earn a masters with little or no extra course work.

The remaining case is when the masters is in a different, complementary discipline. In my case, I earned bachelors and doctoral degrees in mathematics but a masters degree in probability and statistics. For someone in operations research, even if they work primarily on deterministic models (as in my case), and understanding of statistics is useful when estimating model parameters from actual data, and understanding of hypothesis testing is useful when trying to prove that your algorithm is better than the previous benchmark, and an understanding of probability theory is useful in a variety of contexts. I also considered a masters in computer science -- knowing data structures, database management principles and the essence of how compiled code works have all proven useful -- but ended up filling those gaps just by course work.

_Admission and funding aside, what should a potential Ph.D. student look for in a graduate program?_

__Paul:__ If you are aiming at an academic career, look at the job placements for recent graduates. Take a look at publication records for faculty (these days, you can usually find that on a web site at the school), and see if they are active in research. If you know you are interested in a particular subdiscipline (integer programming, compiler design, bionic limbs), look specifically for faculty active in that area. Not only will you want courses or seminars of relevance, but you will need a dissertation chair who has some clue about your topic. Finally, if you can get in touch with a few of their students, try to sniff out what the culture of the relevant department is like, and whether the faculty you most likely would prefer as mentors are accessible, pleasant to work with, and willing to take on students. (A somewhat common misconception among applicants is that you can pick your dissertation advisor. It generally requires mutual consent.) Senior students (the kind you want to quiz) often attend professional meetings (for job hunting as well as for the other attractions of the meeting); that might be a good place to try to make new friends.

_If you could do it over again, would you make any changes to the way you went about getting a Ph.D.?_

__Paul:__ There are small glitches that I would repair if I could -- for instance, my advisor took a sabbatical just as I was finishing my opus, and it sat unread for a full term -- but overall, I have no significant regrets, and there is nothing substantial I would change.

_[Paul Rubin](https://www.msu.edu/~rubin/ "Paul A. Rubin") holds a Ph.D. in mathematics from Michigan State University. He is Professor Emeritus at Michigan State where he started in 1980. He blogs at [OR in an OB World](http://orinanobworld.blogspot.com/) and is active on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/parubin)._
