---
title: Should I Do a Ph.D.? Paul Harper
category: Interview
date: 2013-09-17
slug: should-i-do-a-phd-paul-harper
aliases: [/blog/2013/Sep/17/should-i-do-a-phd-paul-harper/]
---

__Update 12-08-2014:__ I decided to make a dedicated website to host the interviews. You can find it at [shouldigetaphd.com](http://shouldigetaphd.com/).

This week, I talked to Paul Harper, professor of math and O.R. at Cardiff University. Paul brings perspective from inside the British university system where most Ph.D. programs are typically shorter (and involve less coursework).

_A 22-year old college student has been accepted to a Ph.D. program in a technical field. He's academically talented, and he's always enjoyed school and his subject matter. His acceptance is accompanied with 5-years of guaranteed funding. He doesn't have any job offers but suspects he could get a decent job as a software developer. He's not sure what to do. What advice would you give him, or what questions might you suggest he ask himself as he goes about making the decision?_

__Paul:__ Put simply, students should first and foremost ask themselves if they actually __need__ a Ph.D.  If they aspire to an academic career, then almost certainly a Ph.D. will be required. An initial word of warning though; for many straight out of their first degree, knowing what an academic career actually involves or indeed how to climb onto the academic ladder is often not fully understood.  This isn’t surprising, after all most undergraduate students only see their lecturers in the lecture room or in tutorials, and typically don’t appreciate the wide range of responsibilities and pressures they have across teaching, research and administration.  My advice would be to those curious or aspiring to an academic post and thus getting the Ph.D., just as one would seek career guidance for any other job in industry, is seek advice from a variety of sources such as chatting to range of academic staff, research the prospects of employment in your field (see below), grab any opportunity to work on research with potential supervisors to ensure it is something that you’re both passionate about and intellectually able to fulfill (there might well be paid summer internships as an undergraduate, or just offer to work for free if you’re that serious!). There is a reality check though, that permanent academic posts are increasingly hard to come by. Typically (in the UK at least), after a Ph.D. you would still be required/expected to have completed a 2-3 year post-doctoral position before even being considered for a lectureship. In reality you might even end up on multiple post-docs before an opportunity arises. It’s tough and most certainly will require you to be willing to move locations in your quest for that first step on the ladder.  That said, if deep down you know that this is your true desire, then coupled with the right attitude and willingness to put in the effort for potential reward, then go for it!

Based on my own experiences of chatting to Ph.D. applicants, the majority don’t actually know what they want to do by way of career and wish to keep open the possibility of an academic career as well as a stepping-stone in to industry. In this instance the _need_ for the Ph.D. isn’t so clear. There are some industrial jobs that do require or at least highly desire applicants to have a Ph.D., in which case the Ph.D. will again be necessary. Clearly the student should research what qualifications are required for the different careers they are considering. I am also aware of industrial jobs where those entering with a Ph.D. are fast-tracked to more senior posts with overall better prospects, hence the benefits of the Ph.D. might begin to outweigh the negatives such as 5 years of lost salary and industrial experience.

Returning to the case at hand, this student suspects he could get a decent job as a software developer, and so it seems the Ph.D. isn’t required for the job. Here the student should ask himself if he __wants__ to get a Ph.D. (as distinct from an actual _need_ to get it). This is more complex with multiple factors to consider. Going straight into industry should provide 5 years of good income, experience and potential to rise up the career ladder. Staying for the Ph.D. will provide 5 years of much lower income and typically a completely different life and way of working to those in industry (I worked myself in industry for 2 years as a Management Consultant before retuning to University for a Ph.D., so I have some first hand experience of the differences). Ph.D.'s require much more time working independently and in isolation, thus for sure you need to be able to motivate and organise yourself and be able to bounce back from the inevitable lows. It will be tough work, long hours etc, although that can be true of course in industry (as a management consultant I’d spend silly hours at work too). On the plus side, the highs of achievement (a breakthrough in your research) are hard to eclipse, and provide enormous amounts of personal __satisfaction__. For me at least, you can’t put a price on those moments, and I never personally got anything like this level of satisfaction working for those 2 years in industry. Perhaps the best way to summarise the life of a Ph.D. student is to look at the awesome Ph.D. comics ([phdcomics.com](http://www.phdcomics.com/ "Piled Higher and Deeper")) by Jorge Cham, which are spot on!

_What are your thoughts on getting a masters first versus going straight to a Ph.D. in a British university? Would you differentiate that advice for an American-style Ph.D.?_

I would suggest that whether to obtain a masters first versus going straight to the Ph.D. largely depends on the subject area. For instance I obtained my masters first (and moved University to do this) because Operational Research (OR), at least in the UK, is mostly taught at masters . (I only studied one OR module in the final year of my undergraduate degree which sparked my interest.) Masters can therefore offer intensive training (in the UK they are usually 1 year full-time courses) in a particular field that can then be a stepping-stone to the Ph.D., helping to decide on which aspect of the field to focus on for the Ph.D. As Director of MSc programmes at Cardiff University (OR and Applied Statistics), I get many students asking for my advice on the masters versus industry, or masters versus straight to the Ph.D. My advice would be that for those not certain on the Ph.D. (as discussed above) the masters would make more sense as it will improve prospects for both jobs in industry and Ph.D. scholarships. For example the majority of big employers in OR in the UK tend to recruit first from MSc (there are exceptions and good students with exceptional first degrees are highly employable as well without the MSc).

For those students wishing to do a Ph.D. and have high grades, my advice usually differs and that the masters might not be the best investment of their time (and potentially money). An exceptional student could start the Ph.D. and for instance sit in on masters modules as required or attend national training events. Here the differences between the UK Ph.D. and elsewhere become more important. In the UK, a Ph.D. usually lasts for 3.5 years (and certainly not 5 as in the case at hand). Increasingly first year Ph.D. students are required to take taught courses (could be internal modules or as part of national taught course schemes we have in the UK). When I was undertaking my Ph.D. (1998-2001) there were no such programmes or expectations, hence the time to completion was less, typically around 3 years. Introducing the requirement to sit on taught courses is a good move in my view, as it allows the Ph.D. student to widen their knowledge (they may well be asked to study something not directly related to their Ph.D. for instance).  So for the US system, with more formal training in the first 2 years of Ph.D., my advice to go straight to the Ph.D. rather than the masters would probably be strengthened. In the case where the student was absolutely sure they needed or wanted the Ph.D., the masters would seem somewhat unnecessary.

I haven’t yet mentioned scholarships/bursaries, and of course these may play a large part in the decision-making processes too. Typically funds for Ph.D.'s are much harder to obtain, hence the masters first (where possibly more scholarships are available) might at some Universities improve one’s chances of subsequent funding for the Ph.D. Some Universities nowadays in the UK are also offering funded places for a 1+3 scheme (Masters + Ph.D.) so the bundle of funding covers you for both. This is increasingly the preferred option of some of the major UK funding councils, so in future going straight to the Ph.D. might in fact not be an option at all but there will the necessity to complete the Masters first.


_Would you advise an American student to do a Ph.D. at an British university? Visa versa?_

__Paul:__ I suppose the most immediate difference between the US and UK Ph.D.'s is the duration (3 to 4 years compared to more like 5) largely resulting from the necessity of the taught programme components (as discussed above). In practice I imagine the decision would be largely driven by ensuring you have the right supervisor as an expert in their field (whether they happen to be based at a UK or US University), financial considerations (scholarships, cost of living etc) and how much weight one places on how 5 years of a Ph.D. (including the benefits of taught component) in the US compared to less of a time commitment in the UK.


_Admission and funding aside, what should a potential Ph.D. student look for in a graduate program?_

__Paul:__ First and foremost, ensure you find a supervisor/advisor with similar research interests willing to take you on, after all they’ll be a big part of your life for the next several years, and it is very important that your research interests mesh! Consider the reputation of the department, read publications to get a better feel of potential supervisor’s interests and track-record etc. Ask what types of training programmes are available, what teaching/tutorial duties are possible, conference funding, other activities of the research group (seminar series etc) and destinations of recent graduate students. Consider the number of other graduate students under their supervision and indeed within the department as a whole since working within a larger team of fellow grad students can be more supportive and better chances that others are working on similar research work to yourself, although conversely if you are one of many grad students being supervised by the same person, you might expect to have to fight more for their time and attention!

A very common misconception is that applicants can simply pick a supervisor of their choice, but this requires mutual consent. So approach potential supervisors with the courtesy it merits and to impress them both with your research ideas and interests, but also the right attitude to be willing to work hard and to learn. One of my favourite quotes (courtesy of a colleague, [Dr. Vince Knight](https://plus.google.com/110464871801965858778/posts "Vincent Knight - Google+"), from whom I first heard this from) is by Dr Seuss: "It is better to know how to learn than to know."  Hold fast to this principle and it will keep you in good stead!


_[Paul Harper](http://www.profpaulharper.com/) holds a Ph.D. in mathematics from the [University of Southampton](http://www.southampton.ac.uk/ "University of Southampton"). He is Professor of Operations Research and Mathematics at [Cardiff University](http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/ "Cardiff University") in Wales. He is active on [Google+](https://plus.google.com/103137876942082024919/posts "Paul Harper - Google+")._
