---
title: Parsley the Recipe Parser
slug: parsley-the-recipe-parser
aliases: [/blog/2015/Mar/28/parsley-the-recipe-parser/]
aliases: [parsley-the-recipe-parser/]
categories:
  - "Articles"
Author: Tim
---

A few years ago, I created a Github repo with only a readme for a project I was hoping to start. The project was a tool for parsing ingredients from cooking recipes. I never did start this project, and I just decided to delete the Github repository. What follows is the README file I had written.

The parser should take in an unstructured ingredient recipe string and output a structured version of the ingredient.

In particular, we follow the structure described by Rahul Agarwal and Kevin Miller in a [Stanford CS 224n](http://class.stanford.edu/cs224n/Fall2012) [class project](http://nlp.stanford.edu/courses/cs224n/2011/reports/rahul1-kjmiller.pdf).
They four aspects of an ingredient (bullets quoted directly):
* AMOUNT: Defines the quantity of some ingredient. Does not refer to lengths of time, sizes of
objects, etc.
* UNIT : Specifies the unit of measure of an ingredient. Examples include "cup", "tablespoons", as
well as non-standard measures such as "pinch".
* INGREDIENT: The main food word of an item that is mentioned in the ingredient list. Groups or
transformations of sets of ingredients (such as “dough”) do not fall into this category
* DESCRIPTION: A word or phrase that modifies the type of food mentioned, such as the word
"chopped".

For example, the ingredient string

> 1 teaspoon finely chopped, peeled fresh ginger

will be parsed as follows:

* AMOUNT: 1
* UNIT : tsp
* INGREDIENT: ginger
* DESCRIPTION: finely chopped, peeled

and

> 2 (11 ounce) can mandarin orange segments, drained

will/might be parsed as:

* AMOUNT: 22
* UNIT : oz
* INGREDIENT: mandarin orange segments
* DESCRIPTION: drained
